README.md, before:

# chemkit

**Production-ready TypeScript SMILES parser and generator with high RDKit compatibility**

A high-performance, zero-dependency toolkit for parsing and generating SMILES (Simplified Molecular-Input Line-Entry System) notation. Built for cheminformatics applications that need reliable molecule handling in JavaScript/TypeScript.

## Why chemkit?

- **✅ 100% test coverage** — All 482 tests pass, including comprehensive RDKit comparison tests
- **✅ RDKit-validated** — Canonical SMILES generation matches RDKit for 100% of tested molecules (325/325 bulk validation)
- **⚡ Fast & lightweight** — Zero dependencies, pure TypeScript implementation
- **🎯 Production-ready** — Extensively tested with real-world molecules, commercial drugs, and edge cases
- **🔬 Feature-complete** — Full stereochemistry, isotopes, atom class support, and OpenSMILES Standard Form compliance

## Quick Example

```typescript
import { parseSMILES, generateSMILES } from 'chemkit';

// Parse SMILES into molecule structure
const result = parseSMILES('CC(=O)O'); // acetic acid
console.log(result.molecules[0].atoms.length); // 4 atoms
console.log(result.molecules[0].bonds.length); // 3 bonds

// Generate canonical SMILES
const canonical = generateSMILES(result.molecules[0]);
console.log(canonical); // "CC(=O)O"

// Round-trip complex molecules
const aspirin = parseSMILES('CC(=O)Oc1ccccc1C(=O)O');
console.log(generateSMILES(aspirin.molecules[0])); // Canonical form
```

## RDKit Parity & Validation

**chemkit achieves full parity with RDKit** — the gold standard in cheminformatics:

- **482/482 tests passing** ✅ including comprehensive RDKit comparison tests
- **325 molecule bulk validation** — All molecules successfully parsed and round-tripped (100% success rate)
- **0 generation mismatches** — All parsed molecules generate valid SMILES
- **100% RDKit canonical agreement** — All 325 generated canonical SMILES match RDKit's output
- **Real-world validation** — Includes 25 common commercial drugs (aspirin, ibuprofen, acetaminophen, nicotine, morphine, penicillin, testosterone, diazepam, and more)
- **Stereo normalization** — E/Z double bond stereochemistry canonicalized to match RDKit
- **Standard Form compliance** — Implements OpenSMILES 4.3 Standard Form recommendations
- **Continuous validation** — Every commit is tested against RDKit

Tests compare directly with RDKit's canonical SMILES output. chemkit now produces identical canonical SMILES to RDKit for all tested molecules.

## Complete Feature Support

chemkit handles the full SMILES specification:

**Atoms & Elements**
- Organic subset: `B C N O P S F Cl Br I`
- All periodic table elements (brackets required)
- Isotopes: `[13C]`, `[2H]` (deuterium), `[14C]`
- Wildcards: `*` (unknown/unspecified atoms)
- Atom classes: `[C:1]`, `[NH4+:2]` (for reaction mapping)

**Bonds**
- Single, double `=`, triple `#`, quadruple `$`
- Aromatic bonds (implicit in aromatic rings)
- Ring closures with multi-digit support `%10`, `%11`

**Stereochemistry**
- Tetrahedral centers: `@`, `@@`
- Extended chirality: `@TH1`, `@AL1`, `@SP1`
- E/Z double bonds: `/`, `\` with automatic normalization
- Canonical stereo normalization (matches RDKit)
- Ring closure stereo markers

**Charges & Brackets**
- Positive/negative charges: `[NH4+]`, `[O-]`
- Multiple charges: `[Ca+2]`
- Explicit hydrogens: `[CH3]`, `[NH2]`

**Complex Structures**
- Branches: `CC(C)C`
- Nested branches: `CC(C(C)C)C`
- Disconnected molecules: `CC.O` (mixture notation)
- Fused rings: `c1ccc2ccccc2c1` (naphthalene)
- Spiro compounds

## Validation Results

```
Test Suite: 482/482 passing ✅
├─ Parser tests: 18/18 ✅
├─ Comprehensive tests: 99/99 ✅
├─ Isotope tests: 23/23 ✅
├─ Atom class tests: 36/36 ✅
├─ Stereo extras: 11/11 ✅
├─ Additional stereo: 12/12 ✅
├─ Edge cases: 6/6 ✅
├─ RDKit comparison: 2/2 ✅
├─ RDKit canonical: 27/27 ✅
├─ RDKit stereo: 11/11 ✅
├─ Ring stereo: 28/28 ✅
├─ RDKit symmetry: 54/54 ✅
└─ RDKit bulk: 325 molecules ✅

RDKit Bulk Validation:
├─ Parsed: 325/325 (100%)
├─ Generation matches: 325/325 (100%)
├─ RDKit canonical matches: 325/325 (100%)
└─ Parse failures: 0

Commercial Drug Validation (included in bulk):
✅ Aspirin, Ibuprofen, Acetaminophen
✅ Nicotine, Morphine, Testosterone
✅ Penicillin G, Diazepam (Valium)
✅ Diphenhydramine (Benadryl), Nifedipine
✅ Plus 15 additional common pharmaceuticals

RDKit Canonical Stereo Tests:
All stereo SMILES match RDKit exactly, including:
├─ E/Z normalization: C\C=C\C → C/C=C/C (trans)
├─ Tri-substituted alkenes: Cl/C=C(\F)Br → F/C(Br)=C\Cl
├─ Conjugated dienes with multiple stereo centers
└─ Cyclic systems with exocyclic double bonds
```

All generated canonical SMILES match RDKit's output character-for-character.

## Installation

```bash
npm install chemkit
# or
bun add chemkit
# or
pnpm add chemkit
```

## Usage

### Basic Parsing

```typescript
import { parseSMILES } from 'chemkit';

// Simple molecule
const ethanol = parseSMILES('CCO');
console.log(ethanol.molecules[0].atoms.length); // 3

// Check for errors
const result = parseSMILES('invalid');
if (result.errors.length > 0) {
  console.error('Parse errors:', result.errors);
}

// Complex molecule with stereochemistry
const lAlanine = parseSMILES('C[C@H](N)C(=O)O');
const chiralCenter = lAlanine.molecules[0].atoms.find(a => a.chiral);
console.log(chiralCenter?.chiral); // '@'
```

### Molecular Properties

```typescript
import { parseSMILES, getMolecularFormula, getMolecularMass, getExactMass } from 'chemkit';

const aspirin = parseSMILES('CC(=O)Oc1ccccc1C(=O)O');
const mol = aspirin.molecules[0];

// Get molecular formula
const formula = getMolecularFormula(mol);
console.log(formula); // "C9H8O4"

// Get molecular mass (average atomic masses)
const mass = getMolecularMass(mol);
console.log(mass); // 180.04225...

// Get exact mass (most abundant isotope)
const exactMass = getExactMass(mol);
console.log(exactMass); // 180.04225...
```

### Generating SMILES

```typescript
import { parseSMILES, generateSMILES } from 'chemkit';

// Generate canonical SMILES (default)
const input = 'CC(C)CC';
const parsed = parseSMILES(input);
const canonical = generateSMILES(parsed.molecules[0]);
console.log(canonical); // "CCC(C)C" - canonicalized

// Stereo normalization matches RDKit
const trans1 = parseSMILES('C\\C=C\\C'); // trans (down markers)
console.log(generateSMILES(trans1.molecules[0])); // "C/C=C/C" - normalized to up markers

const trans2 = parseSMILES('C/C=C/C'); // trans (up markers)
console.log(generateSMILES(trans2.molecules[0])); // "C/C=C/C" - already normalized

// Generate simple (non-canonical) SMILES
const simple = generateSMILES(parsed.molecules[0], false);
console.log(simple); // "CC(C)CC" - preserves input order

// Explicit canonical generation
const explicitCanonical = generateSMILES(parsed.molecules[0], true);
console.log(explicitCanonical); // "CCC(C)C"

// Handle multiple disconnected molecules
const mixture = parseSMILES('CCO.O'); // ethanol + water
const output = generateSMILES(mixture.molecules);
console.log(output); // "CCO.O"
```

### Molecule Structure

```typescript
import { parseSMILES } from 'chemkit';
import { BondType } from 'chemkit/types';

const result = parseSMILES('C=C');
const mol = result.molecules[0];

// Access atoms
mol.atoms.forEach(atom => {
  console.log(`${atom.symbol} (id: ${atom.id})`);
  console.log(`  Aromatic: ${atom.aromatic}`);
  console.log(`  Charge: ${atom.charge}`);
  console.log(`  Hydrogens: ${atom.hydrogens}`);
});

// Access bonds
mol.bonds.forEach(bond => {
  console.log(`Bond ${bond.atom1}-${bond.atom2}`);
  console.log(`  Type: ${bond.type === BondType.DOUBLE ? 'DOUBLE' : 'SINGLE'}`);
});
```

## Running Tests

```bash
# Run all tests (includes RDKit comparisons)
bun test

# Run with Node.js
npm test

# Run specific test file
bun test test/parser.test.ts
```

**Note**: RDKit comparison tests require `@rdkit/rdkit` package. Tests will automatically skip RDKit validations if the package is unavailable. For full validation, ensure you're running tests with Node.js (RDKit's WebAssembly may not work in all Bun versions).

## API Reference

### `parseSMILES(smiles: string): ParseResult`

Parses a SMILES string into molecule structures.

**Returns**: `ParseResult` containing:
- `molecules: Molecule[]` — Array of parsed molecules
- `errors: string[]` — Parse/validation errors (empty if successful)

### `generateSMILES(input: Molecule | Molecule[], canonical?: boolean): string`

Generates SMILES from molecule structure(s).

**Parameters**:
- `input` — Single molecule or array of molecules
- `canonical` — Generate canonical SMILES (default: `true`)

**Returns**: SMILES string (uses `.` to separate disconnected molecules)

**Canonical SMILES features**:
- RDKit-compatible atom ordering using modified Morgan algorithm
- Automatic E/Z double bond stereo normalization
- Deterministic output for identical molecules
- Preserves tetrahedral and double bond stereochemistry

### `getMolecularFormula(molecule: Molecule): string`

Returns the molecular formula in Hill notation (C first, then H, then alphabetical).

**Example**: `C9H8O4` for aspirin

### `getMolecularMass(molecule: Molecule): number`

Returns the molecular mass using average atomic masses from the periodic table.

**Example**: `180.042` for aspirin

### `getExactMass(molecule: Molecule): number`

Returns the exact mass using the most abundant isotope for each element.

**Example**: `180.042` for aspirin

### Types

```typescript
interface Molecule {
  atoms: Atom[];
  bonds: Bond[];
}

interface Atom {
  id: number;
  symbol: string;
  aromatic: boolean;
  hydrogens: number;
  charge: number;
  isotope: number | null;
  chiral: string | null;
  atomClass: number | null;
  isBracket: boolean;
  atomicNumber: number;
}

interface Bond {
  atom1: number;
  atom2: number;
  type: BondType;
  stereo: StereoType;
}

enum BondType {
  SINGLE = 1,
  DOUBLE = 2,
  TRIPLE = 3,
  QUADRUPLE = 4,
  AROMATIC = 5
}
```

## Performance

chemkit is designed for production use with real-world performance:

- **Parsing**: ~1-10ms per molecule (depending on complexity)
- **Generation**: ~1-5ms per molecule
- **Memory**: Minimal overhead, compact AST representation
- **Zero dependencies**: No external runtime dependencies

Benchmark with 325 diverse molecules including commercial drugs: Average parse + generate round-trip < 5ms

## Edge Cases & Limitations

chemkit handles 100% of tested SMILES correctly (325/325 in bulk validation).

**Key implementation details**:

- **Stereo normalization**: Trans alkenes are automatically normalized to use `/` (up) markers on both ends to match RDKit's canonical form. For example, `C\C=C\C` and `C/C=C/C` both represent trans configuration and canonicalize to `C/C=C/C`.

- **Canonical ordering**: Atoms are ordered using a modified Morgan algorithm matching RDKit's approach, with tie-breaking by atomic number, degree, and other properties.

- **Aromatic validation**: Aromatic notation (lowercase letters) is accepted as specified in SMILES. The parser validates that aromatic atoms are in rings but accepts aromatic notation without strict Hückel rule enforcement, matching RDKit's behavior for broader compatibility.

This implementation has been validated against RDKit's canonical SMILES output for diverse molecule sets including stereocenters, complex rings, heteroatoms, and 25 commercial pharmaceutical drugs.

## Project Structure

```
chemkit/
├── parser.ts              # SMILES parser with validation
├── src/
│   ├── generators/        # Canonical SMILES generator
│   ├── validators/        # Aromaticity, valence, stereo validation
│   ├── parsers/           # Bracket notation parser
│   └── utils/             # Ring finding, atom utilities
├── types.ts               # TypeScript type definitions
├── index.ts               # Public API exports
├── test/                  # Comprehensive test suite
│   ├── parser.test.ts     # Basic parsing tests (18 tests)
│   ├── comprehensive.test.ts  # Full feature tests (99 tests)
│   ├── isotope.test.ts    # Isotope support (23 tests)
│   ├── atom-class.test.ts # Atom class support (36 tests)
│   ├── stereo-extra.test.ts   # Stereo edge cases (11 tests)
│   ├── stereo-additional.test.ts # Additional stereo tests (12 tests)
│   ├── edge-cases.test.ts     # OpenSMILES edge cases (6 tests)
│   ├── rdkit-comparison.test.ts # RDKit validation (2 tests)
│   ├── rdkit-canonical.test.ts # RDKit canonical (27 tests)
│   ├── rdkit-stereo.test.ts   # RDKit stereo comparison (11 tests)
│   ├── ring-stereo.test.ts    # Ring stereo validation (10 tests)
│   └── rdkit-bulk.test.ts     # Bulk validation (325 molecules, includes 25 drugs)
└── rdkit-bulk-report.json # Validation results
```

## Key Implementation Features

### Canonical SMILES Generation

chemkit implements RDKit-compatible canonical SMILES generation:

1. **Modified Morgan Algorithm**: Atoms are canonically ordered using iterative refinement based on:
   - Canonical rank (connectivity signature)
   - Atomic number (tie-breaker)
   - Degree, isotope, charge
   - Neighbor properties

2. **Starting Atom Selection** (RDKit-compatible):
   - **Primary criterion**: Canonical label (lowest rank wins)
   - **Tie-breakers** (in order): Heteroatom preference → Terminal atom → Lower degree → Lower charge
   - **Design choice**: Prioritizes canonical labels over heteroatom preference for deterministic output
   - **Note**: The OpenSMILES specification (Section 4.3.4) recommends starting on heteroatoms first (e.g., `OCCC` over `CCCO`), but RDKit prioritizes canonical ordering for deterministic behavior
   - **Result**: Both approaches are chemically equivalent; chemkit follows RDKit for maximum interoperability

3. **Stereo Normalization**: E/Z double bond stereochemistry is normalized to a canonical form:
   - Trans (E) alkenes: Both markers pointing up (`/`) - e.g., `C/C=C/C`
   - Cis (Z) alkenes: Opposing markers (`/` and `\`) - e.g., `C/C=C\C`
   - Ensures equivalent stereo representations canonicalize identically

4. **Deterministic Output**: Same molecule always produces the same canonical SMILES, enabling reliable structure comparison and database storage.

**Example of RDKit-compatible behavior**:
```typescript
// Both inputs represent the same molecule (hydrogen cyanide)
parseSMILES('C#N');  // → canonical: "C#N" (carbon first)
parseSMILES('N#C');  // → canonical: "C#N" (canonical labels prioritized)

// Both inputs represent the same molecule (propanol)
parseSMILES('OCCC'); // → canonical: "CCCO" (canonical labels prioritized)
parseSMILES('CCCO'); // → canonical: "CCCO"
```

This implementation achieves 100% agreement with RDKit's canonical output across 325 diverse test molecules including 25 commercial pharmaceutical drugs.

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! chemkit maintains strict quality standards:

1. **All tests must pass** — 482/482 required
2. **RDKit parity required** — Canonical SMILES must match RDKit output exactly
3. **Add tests for new features** — Test coverage is mandatory
4. **Follow TypeScript conventions** — See `AGENTS.md` for guidelines

To contribute:
```bash
# Clone and install
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/chemkit.git
cd chemkit
bun install

# Make changes and test
bun test

# Type check
bun run tsc

# Submit PR with tests
```

## Use Cases

chemkit is perfect for:

- **Cheminformatics web applications** — Client-side molecule parsing
- **Chemical databases** — Canonical SMILES storage and comparison
- **Molecule editors** — Import/export SMILES notation
- **Drug discovery tools** — Structure representation and validation
- **Educational software** — Teaching chemical notation
- **API services** — Fast molecule processing in Node.js

## License

MIT

## Acknowledgments

- Validated against [RDKit](https://www.rdkit.org/) — the leading open-source cheminformatics toolkit
- SMILES specification: [Daylight Theory Manual](https://www.daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory/)
- Inspired by the need for production-ready cheminformatics in JavaScript/TypeScript

Commit message:

docs: update README with instructions for running heavy RDKit comparisons; remove next-features.md test: gate long-running RDKit tests behind RUN_RDKIT_BULK environment variable

README.md, after:

# chemkit

**Production-ready TypeScript SMILES parser and generator with high RDKit compatibility**

A high-performance, zero-dependency toolkit for parsing and generating SMILES (Simplified Molecular-Input Line-Entry System) notation. Built for cheminformatics applications that need reliable molecule handling in JavaScript/TypeScript.

## Why chemkit?

- **✅ 100% test coverage** — All 482 tests pass, including comprehensive RDKit comparison tests
- **✅ RDKit-validated** — Canonical SMILES generation matches RDKit for 100% of tested molecules (325/325 bulk validation)
- **⚡ Fast & lightweight** — Zero dependencies, pure TypeScript implementation
- **🎯 Production-ready** — Extensively tested with real-world molecules, commercial drugs, and edge cases
- **🔬 Feature-complete** — Full stereochemistry, isotopes, atom class support, and OpenSMILES Standard Form compliance

## Quick Example

```typescript
import { parseSMILES, generateSMILES } from 'chemkit';

// Parse SMILES into molecule structure
const result = parseSMILES('CC(=O)O'); // acetic acid
console.log(result.molecules[0].atoms.length); // 4 atoms
console.log(result.molecules[0].bonds.length); // 3 bonds

// Generate canonical SMILES
const canonical = generateSMILES(result.molecules[0]);
console.log(canonical); // "CC(=O)O"

// Round-trip complex molecules
const aspirin = parseSMILES('CC(=O)Oc1ccccc1C(=O)O');
console.log(generateSMILES(aspirin.molecules[0])); // Canonical form
```

## RDKit Parity & Validation

**chemkit achieves full parity with RDKit** — the gold standard in cheminformatics:

- **482/482 tests passing** ✅ including comprehensive RDKit comparison tests
- **325 molecule bulk validation** — All molecules successfully parsed and round-tripped (100% success rate)
- **0 generation mismatches** — All parsed molecules generate valid SMILES
- **100% RDKit canonical agreement** — All 325 generated canonical SMILES match RDKit's output
- **Real-world validation** — Includes 25 common commercial drugs (aspirin, ibuprofen, acetaminophen, nicotine, morphine, penicillin, testosterone, diazepam, and more)
- **Stereo normalization** — E/Z double bond stereochemistry canonicalized to match RDKit
- **Standard Form compliance** — Implements OpenSMILES 4.3 Standard Form recommendations
- **Continuous validation** — Every commit is tested against RDKit

Tests compare directly with RDKit's canonical SMILES output. chemkit now produces identical canonical SMILES to RDKit for all tested molecules.

## Complete Feature Support

chemkit handles the full SMILES specification:

**Atoms & Elements**
- Organic subset: `B C N O P S F Cl Br I`
- All periodic table elements (brackets required)
- Isotopes: `[13C]`, `[2H]` (deuterium), `[14C]`
- Wildcards: `*` (unknown/unspecified atoms)
- Atom classes: `[C:1]`, `[NH4+:2]` (for reaction mapping)

**Bonds**
- Single, double `=`, triple `#`, quadruple `$`
- Aromatic bonds (implicit in aromatic rings)
- Ring closures with multi-digit support `%10`, `%11`

**Stereochemistry**
- Tetrahedral centers: `@`, `@@`
- Extended chirality: `@TH1`, `@AL1`, `@SP1`
- E/Z double bonds: `/`, `\` with automatic normalization
- Canonical stereo normalization (matches RDKit)
- Ring closure stereo markers

**Charges & Brackets**
- Positive/negative charges: `[NH4+]`, `[O-]`
- Multiple charges: `[Ca+2]`
- Explicit hydrogens: `[CH3]`, `[NH2]`

**Complex Structures**
- Branches: `CC(C)C`
- Nested branches: `CC(C(C)C)C`
- Disconnected molecules: `CC.O` (mixture notation)
- Fused rings: `c1ccc2ccccc2c1` (naphthalene)
- Spiro compounds

## Validation Results

```
Test Suite: 482/482 passing ✅
├─ Parser tests: 18/18 ✅
├─ Comprehensive tests: 99/99 ✅
├─ Isotope tests: 23/23 ✅
├─ Atom class tests: 36/36 ✅
├─ Stereo extras: 11/11 ✅
├─ Additional stereo: 12/12 ✅
├─ Edge cases: 6/6 ✅
├─ RDKit comparison: 2/2 ✅
├─ RDKit canonical: 27/27 ✅
├─ RDKit stereo: 11/11 ✅
├─ Ring stereo: 28/28 ✅
├─ RDKit symmetry: 54/54 ✅
└─ RDKit bulk: 325 molecules ✅

RDKit Bulk Validation:
├─ Parsed: 325/325 (100%)
├─ Generation matches: 325/325 (100%)
├─ RDKit canonical matches: 325/325 (100%)
└─ Parse failures: 0

Commercial Drug Validation (included in bulk):
✅ Aspirin, Ibuprofen, Acetaminophen
✅ Nicotine, Morphine, Testosterone
✅ Penicillin G, Diazepam (Valium)
✅ Diphenhydramine (Benadryl), Nifedipine
✅ Plus 15 additional common pharmaceuticals

RDKit Canonical Stereo Tests:
All stereo SMILES match RDKit exactly, including:
├─ E/Z normalization: C\C=C\C → C/C=C/C (trans)
├─ Tri-substituted alkenes: Cl/C=C(\F)Br → F/C(Br)=C\Cl
├─ Conjugated dienes with multiple stereo centers
└─ Cyclic systems with exocyclic double bonds
```

All generated canonical SMILES match RDKit's output character-for-character.

## Installation

```bash
npm install chemkit
# or
bun add chemkit
# or
pnpm add chemkit
```

## Usage

### Basic Parsing


### Running heavy RDKit comparisons

The repository contains two long-running RDKit comparison tests (the 10k SMILES suite and the bulk 300-SMILES suite). These tests are skipped by default to keep regular test runs fast.

To run them set the `RUN_RDKIT_BULK` environment variable:

```bash
# Run heavy RDKit comparisons (rdkit-10k and rdkit-bulk)
RUN_RDKIT_BULK=1 bun test
```

Add `RUN_VERBOSE=1` for more detailed RDKit reporting during the run.
```typescript
import { parseSMILES } from 'chemkit';

// Simple molecule
const ethanol = parseSMILES('CCO');
console.log(ethanol.molecules[0].atoms.length); // 3

// Check for errors
const result = parseSMILES('invalid');
if (result.errors.length > 0) {
  console.error('Parse errors:', result.errors);
}

// Complex molecule with stereochemistry
const lAlanine = parseSMILES('C[C@H](N)C(=O)O');
const chiralCenter = lAlanine.molecules[0].atoms.find(a => a.chiral);
console.log(chiralCenter?.chiral); // '@'
```

### Molecular Properties

```typescript
import { parseSMILES, getMolecularFormula, getMolecularMass, getExactMass } from 'chemkit';

const aspirin = parseSMILES('CC(=O)Oc1ccccc1C(=O)O');
const mol = aspirin.molecules[0];

// Get molecular formula
const formula = getMolecularFormula(mol);
console.log(formula); // "C9H8O4"

// Get molecular mass (average atomic masses)
const mass = getMolecularMass(mol);
console.log(mass); // 180.04225...

// Get exact mass (most abundant isotope)
const exactMass = getExactMass(mol);
console.log(exactMass); // 180.04225...
```

### Generating SMILES

```typescript
import { parseSMILES, generateSMILES } from 'chemkit';

// Generate canonical SMILES (default)
const input = 'CC(C)CC';
const parsed = parseSMILES(input);
const canonical = generateSMILES(parsed.molecules[0]);
console.log(canonical); // "CCC(C)C" - canonicalized

// Stereo normalization matches RDKit
const trans1 = parseSMILES('C\\C=C\\C'); // trans (down markers)
console.log(generateSMILES(trans1.molecules[0])); // "C/C=C/C" - normalized to up markers

const trans2 = parseSMILES('C/C=C/C'); // trans (up markers)
console.log(generateSMILES(trans2.molecules[0])); // "C/C=C/C" - already normalized

// Generate simple (non-canonical) SMILES
const simple = generateSMILES(parsed.molecules[0], false);
console.log(simple); // "CC(C)CC" - preserves input order

// Explicit canonical generation
const explicitCanonical = generateSMILES(parsed.molecules[0], true);
console.log(explicitCanonical); // "CCC(C)C"

// Handle multiple disconnected molecules
const mixture = parseSMILES('CCO.O'); // ethanol + water
const output = generateSMILES(mixture.molecules);
console.log(output); // "CCO.O"
```

### Molecule Structure

```typescript
import { parseSMILES } from 'chemkit';
import { BondType } from 'chemkit/types';

const result = parseSMILES('C=C');
const mol = result.molecules[0];

// Access atoms
mol.atoms.forEach(atom => {
  console.log(`${atom.symbol} (id: ${atom.id})`);
  console.log(`  Aromatic: ${atom.aromatic}`);
  console.log(`  Charge: ${atom.charge}`);
  console.log(`  Hydrogens: ${atom.hydrogens}`);
});

// Access bonds
mol.bonds.forEach(bond => {
  console.log(`Bond ${bond.atom1}-${bond.atom2}`);
  console.log(`  Type: ${bond.type === BondType.DOUBLE ? 'DOUBLE' : 'SINGLE'}`);
});
```

## Running Tests

```bash
# Run all tests (includes RDKit comparisons)
bun test

# Run with Node.js
npm test

# Run specific test file
bun test test/parser.test.ts
```

**Note**: RDKit comparison tests require `@rdkit/rdkit` package. Tests will automatically skip RDKit validations if the package is unavailable. For full validation, ensure you're running tests with Node.js (RDKit's WebAssembly may not work in all Bun versions).

## API Reference

### `parseSMILES(smiles: string): ParseResult`

Parses a SMILES string into molecule structures.

**Returns**: `ParseResult` containing:
- `molecules: Molecule[]` — Array of parsed molecules
- `errors: string[]` — Parse/validation errors (empty if successful)

### `generateSMILES(input: Molecule | Molecule[], canonical?: boolean): string`

Generates SMILES from molecule structure(s).

**Parameters**:
- `input` — Single molecule or array of molecules
- `canonical` — Generate canonical SMILES (default: `true`)

**Returns**: SMILES string (uses `.` to separate disconnected molecules)

**Canonical SMILES features**:
- RDKit-compatible atom ordering using modified Morgan algorithm
- Automatic E/Z double bond stereo normalization
- Deterministic output for identical molecules
- Preserves tetrahedral and double bond stereochemistry

### `getMolecularFormula(molecule: Molecule): string`

Returns the molecular formula in Hill notation (C first, then H, then alphabetical).

**Example**: `C9H8O4` for aspirin

### `getMolecularMass(molecule: Molecule): number`

Returns the molecular mass using average atomic masses from the periodic table.

**Example**: `180.042` for aspirin

### `getExactMass(molecule: Molecule): number`

Returns the exact mass using the most abundant isotope for each element.

**Example**: `180.042` for aspirin

### Types

```typescript
interface Molecule {
  atoms: Atom[];
  bonds: Bond[];
}

interface Atom {
  id: number;
  symbol: string;
  aromatic: boolean;
  hydrogens: number;
  charge: number;
  isotope: number | null;
  chiral: string | null;
  atomClass: number | null;
  isBracket: boolean;
  atomicNumber: number;
}

interface Bond {
  atom1: number;
  atom2: number;
  type: BondType;
  stereo: StereoType;
}

enum BondType {
  SINGLE = 1,
  DOUBLE = 2,
  TRIPLE = 3,
  QUADRUPLE = 4,
  AROMATIC = 5
}
```

## Performance

chemkit is designed for production use with real-world performance:

- **Parsing**: ~1-10ms per molecule (depending on complexity)
- **Generation**: ~1-5ms per molecule
- **Memory**: Minimal overhead, compact AST representation
- **Zero dependencies**: No external runtime dependencies

Benchmark with 325 diverse molecules including commercial drugs: Average parse + generate round-trip < 5ms

## Edge Cases & Limitations

chemkit handles 100% of tested SMILES correctly (325/325 in bulk validation).

**Key implementation details**:

- **Stereo normalization**: Trans alkenes are automatically normalized to use `/` (up) markers on both ends to match RDKit's canonical form. For example, `C\C=C\C` and `C/C=C/C` both represent trans configuration and canonicalize to `C/C=C/C`.

- **Canonical ordering**: Atoms are ordered using a modified Morgan algorithm matching RDKit's approach, with tie-breaking by atomic number, degree, and other properties.

- **Aromatic validation**: Aromatic notation (lowercase letters) is accepted as specified in SMILES. The parser validates that aromatic atoms are in rings but accepts aromatic notation without strict Hückel rule enforcement, matching RDKit's behavior for broader compatibility.

This implementation has been validated against RDKit's canonical SMILES output for diverse molecule sets including stereocenters, complex rings, heteroatoms, and 25 commercial pharmaceutical drugs.

## Project Structure

```
chemkit/
├── parser.ts              # SMILES parser with validation
├── src/
│   ├── generators/        # Canonical SMILES generator
│   ├── validators/        # Aromaticity, valence, stereo validation
│   ├── parsers/           # Bracket notation parser
│   └── utils/             # Ring finding, atom utilities
├── types.ts               # TypeScript type definitions
├── index.ts               # Public API exports
├── test/                  # Comprehensive test suite
│   ├── parser.test.ts     # Basic parsing tests (18 tests)
│   ├── comprehensive.test.ts  # Full feature tests (99 tests)
│   ├── isotope.test.ts    # Isotope support (23 tests)
│   ├── atom-class.test.ts # Atom class support (36 tests)
│   ├── stereo-extra.test.ts   # Stereo edge cases (11 tests)
│   ├── stereo-additional.test.ts # Additional stereo tests (12 tests)
│   ├── edge-cases.test.ts     # OpenSMILES edge cases (6 tests)
│   ├── rdkit-comparison.test.ts # RDKit validation (2 tests)
│   ├── rdkit-canonical.test.ts # RDKit canonical (27 tests)
│   ├── rdkit-stereo.test.ts   # RDKit stereo comparison (11 tests)
│   ├── ring-stereo.test.ts    # Ring stereo validation (10 tests)
│   └── rdkit-bulk.test.ts     # Bulk validation (325 molecules, includes 25 drugs)
└── rdkit-bulk-report.json # Validation results
```

## Key Implementation Features

### Canonical SMILES Generation

chemkit implements RDKit-compatible canonical SMILES generation:

1. **Modified Morgan Algorithm**: Atoms are canonically ordered using iterative refinement based on:
   - Canonical rank (connectivity signature)
   - Atomic number (tie-breaker)
   - Degree, isotope, charge
   - Neighbor properties

2. **Starting Atom Selection** (RDKit-compatible):
   - **Primary criterion**: Canonical label (lowest rank wins)
   - **Tie-breakers** (in order): Heteroatom preference → Terminal atom → Lower degree → Lower charge
   - **Design choice**: Prioritizes canonical labels over heteroatom preference for deterministic output
   - **Note**: The OpenSMILES specification (Section 4.3.4) recommends starting on heteroatoms first (e.g., `OCCC` over `CCCO`), but RDKit prioritizes canonical ordering for deterministic behavior
   - **Result**: Both approaches are chemically equivalent; chemkit follows RDKit for maximum interoperability

3. **Stereo Normalization**: E/Z double bond stereochemistry is normalized to a canonical form:
   - Trans (E) alkenes: Both markers pointing up (`/`) - e.g., `C/C=C/C`
   - Cis (Z) alkenes: Opposing markers (`/` and `\`) - e.g., `C/C=C\C`
   - Ensures equivalent stereo representations canonicalize identically

4. **Deterministic Output**: Same molecule always produces the same canonical SMILES, enabling reliable structure comparison and database storage.

**Example of RDKit-compatible behavior**:
```typescript
// Both inputs represent the same molecule (hydrogen cyanide)
parseSMILES('C#N');  // → canonical: "C#N" (carbon first)
parseSMILES('N#C');  // → canonical: "C#N" (canonical labels prioritized)

// Both inputs represent the same molecule (propanol)
parseSMILES('OCCC'); // → canonical: "CCCO" (canonical labels prioritized)
parseSMILES('CCCO'); // → canonical: "CCCO"
```

This implementation achieves 100% agreement with RDKit's canonical output across 325 diverse test molecules including 25 commercial pharmaceutical drugs.

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! chemkit maintains strict quality standards:

1. **All tests must pass** — 482/482 required
2. **RDKit parity required** — Canonical SMILES must match RDKit output exactly
3. **Add tests for new features** — Test coverage is mandatory
4. **Follow TypeScript conventions** — See `AGENTS.md` for guidelines

To contribute:
```bash
# Clone and install
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/chemkit.git
cd chemkit
bun install

# Make changes and test
bun test

# Type check
bun run tsc

# Submit PR with tests
```

## Use Cases

chemkit is perfect for:

- **Cheminformatics web applications** — Client-side molecule parsing
- **Chemical databases** — Canonical SMILES storage and comparison
- **Molecule editors** — Import/export SMILES notation
- **Drug discovery tools** — Structure representation and validation
- **Educational software** — Teaching chemical notation
- **API services** — Fast molecule processing in Node.js

## License

MIT

## Acknowledgments

- Validated against [RDKit](https://www.rdkit.org/) — the leading open-source cheminformatics toolkit
- SMILES specification: [Daylight Theory Manual](https://www.daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory/)
- Inspired by the need for production-ready cheminformatics in JavaScript/TypeScript
