docs/logp-implementation-notes.md, before:

# Crippen LogP Implementation Notes

## Overview

This document describes the Crippen LogP (octanol-water partition coefficient) implementation in kimchi and documents known differences with RDKit's implementation.

## Implementation

The LogP calculation is implemented in `src/utils/logp.ts` using the Wildman-Crippen atom contribution method:

- **Method**: Wildman-Crippen atom-type based LogP estimation
- **Parameters**: Standard published Wildman-Crippen parameters (68 atom type patterns)
- **Matching**: SMARTS-based pattern matching with priority ordering

### Key Functions

- `computeLogP(mol, includeHs)` - Computes total LogP for a molecule
- **Aliases**: `logP(mol, includeHs)` and `crippenLogP(mol, includeHs)` for convenience and clarity
- **RDKit Mapping**: Corresponds to RDKit's `CrippenClogP` descriptor (from `rdkit.Chem.Crippen.MolLogP`)
- `getCrippenAtomContribs(mol, includeHs)` - Returns per-atom LogP and MR contributions
- `calcCrippenDescriptors(mol, includeHs)` - Returns both LogP and molar refractivity

## Validation Against RDKit

### Test Coverage

- **Basic validation**: 10+ common molecules with exact RDKit match (threshold 0.01)
- **Diverse molecules**: 200 molecules from bulk test set (threshold 0.2)
- **Overall accuracy**: >99% of molecules within 0.2 LogP units of RDKit

### Known Differences

Our implementation shows systematic differences from RDKit for specific molecular patterns:

#### 1. Aromatic Sulfur in Heterocycles

**Affected structures**:
- Dithiolones: `C1=CSC(=O)S1` 
- Thiazines: `C1=CC=C2SC=CC(=O)N2C=C1`
- Thiadiazoles with exocyclic substituents

**Difference magnitude**: 0.6-0.8 LogP units

**Root cause**:
- Both implementations correctly identify these sulfurs as aromatic
- Our implementation assigns aromatic sulfurs the value 0.6237 (pattern `[s;a]`, S3 parameter)
- RDKit appears to use ~0.3 for sulfurs in heterocycles with exocyclic C=O or C=N
- This suggests RDKit has additional SMARTS patterns or modified parameters for these cases

**Example**:
```
Dithiolone: C1=CSC(=O)S1
  Our LogP: 1.77 (without H)
  RDKit:    1.17 (without H)
  Diff:     0.60 (0.30 per S atom)
```

#### 2. Complex Nitrogen Heterocycles

**Affected structures**:
- Oxadiazinones: `C1C=CCN1C(=O)CN2C(=O)OC(=N2)C3=CC=CC=C3`
- Pyrazolones with multiple nitrogen substitution

**Difference magnitude**: 0.3-0.8 LogP units

**Root cause**:
- Differences in how aromatic vs aliphatic nitrogen is classified in partially saturated rings
- SMARTS pattern matching order differences
- Our implementation uses exact published Crippen parameters; RDKit may use modified values

#### 3. Fused Ring Systems with Heteroatoms

**Affected structures**:
- Naphthalene ethers with lactones
- Benzofuran/benzothiophene derivatives with exocyclic groups

**Difference magnitude**: 0.2-0.3 LogP units

**Root cause**:
- Minor differences in aromatic carbon classification (C18-C26 patterns)
- Different handling of aromatic-aliphatic junction carbons

## Aromaticity Perception

**Important**: The LogP differences are NOT due to aromaticity perception errors.

Our aromaticity perception was validated against RDKit for all problematic cases:

```
Structure: C1=CSC(=O)S1 (dithiolone)
  Our aromatic SMILES: c1csc(=O)s1
  RDKit aromatic SMILES: c1csc(=O)s1
  ✓ Aromaticity matches exactly
```

Both implementations correctly:
- Mark dithiolone sulfurs as aromatic
- Mark thiazine sulfurs as aromatic
- Handle exocyclic double bonds on aromatic carbons

## Why Differences Exist

### Published vs Implemented Parameters

The Wildman-Crippen method was published with specific SMARTS patterns and contribution values. However:

1. **RDKit may use modified parameters** - The original publication allows for refinement
2. **Pattern matching order** - Different SMARTS matching sequences can yield different results
3. **Edge case handling** - Complex heterocycles may have special-case logic in RDKit
4. **Parameter evolution** - RDKit's parameters may have been tuned over time for accuracy

### Our Design Choice

We chose to implement the **published Wildman-Crippen parameters exactly as specified**:

- Ensures reproducibility against the published method
- Provides transparency (no hidden modifications)
- Maintains consistency with the academic reference

## Accuracy Assessment

### Statistical Performance

From 200 diverse molecule test:
- **Mean absolute difference**: ~0.08 LogP units
- **Median difference**: ~0.05 LogP units  
- **95th percentile**: ~0.20 LogP units
- **Maximum difference**: ~1.15 LogP units (complex thiazine)

### Acceptable Range

LogP prediction methods typically have:
- **Experimental error**: ±0.5 LogP units
- **Method variance**: ±0.3 LogP units between different software
- **Literature discrepancies**: ±1.0 LogP units for complex molecules

Our differences (0.2-1.15) are **within the expected range** for:
- Complex polycyclic heterocycles
- Molecules with multiple heteroatoms
- Structures with both aromatic and aliphatic character

## Recommendations

### When to Use This Implementation

✅ **Good for**:
- Simple organic molecules (alkanes, alcohols, aromatics)
- Standard drug-like molecules
- High-throughput screening where consistency matters
- Research requiring published method reproducibility

### When Differences May Matter

⚠️ **Consider RDKit if**:
- Exact RDKit LogP values are required for comparison
- Working with many sulfur-containing heterocycles
- Need LogP for regulatory submissions (use validated tools)
- Optimizing against experimental data fitted to RDKit

### Improving Accuracy

If tighter RDKit agreement is needed:

1. **Add specialized patterns** for S-heterocycles before generic `[s;a]`
2. **Tune parameter values** for problematic atom types (requires validation dataset)
3. **Implement RDKit-specific rules** (sacrifices published method adherence)

## References

- Wildman, S. A.; Crippen, G. M. "Prediction of Physicochemical Parameters by Atomic Contributions." J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 1999, 39, 868-873.
- RDKit Documentation: https://www.rdkit.org/docs/GettingStartedInPython.html#clogp

## Test Files

- `test/unit/logp.test.ts` - Main LogP tests with RDKit comparison
- `test/unit/logp-detailed.test.ts` - Additional edge cases
- Test threshold: 0.2 LogP units for complex molecules, 0.01 for simple molecules

Commit message:

docs: add examples and update LogP/molecular-properties
Move example files into docs/examples, add playground, and update LogP/molecular-properties and tests

docs/logp-implementation-notes.md, after:

# Crippen LogP Implementation Notes

## Overview

This document describes the Crippen LogP (octanol-water partition coefficient) implementation in kimchi and documents known differences with RDKit's implementation.

**Note**: LogP is integrated into Lipinski's Rule of Five evaluation. See [Drug-Likeness Rules](../docs/descriptors.md#drug-likeness-rules) for usage in drug discovery applications.

## Implementation

The LogP calculation is implemented in `src/utils/logp.ts` using the Wildman-Crippen atom contribution method:

- **Method**: Wildman-Crippen atom-type based LogP estimation
- **Parameters**: Standard published Wildman-Crippen parameters (68 atom type patterns)
- **Matching**: SMARTS-based pattern matching with priority ordering

### Key Functions

- `computeLogP(mol, includeHs)` - Computes total LogP for a molecule
- **Aliases**: `logP(mol, includeHs)` and `crippenLogP(mol, includeHs)` for convenience and clarity
- **RDKit Mapping**: Corresponds to RDKit's `CrippenClogP` descriptor (from `rdkit.Chem.Crippen.MolLogP`)
- `getCrippenAtomContribs(mol, includeHs)` - Returns per-atom LogP and MR contributions
- `calcCrippenDescriptors(mol, includeHs)` - Returns both LogP and molar refractivity

## Validation Against RDKit

### Test Coverage

- **Basic validation**: 10+ common molecules with exact RDKit match (threshold 0.01)
- **Diverse molecules**: 200 molecules from bulk test set (threshold 0.2)
- **Overall accuracy**: >99% of molecules within 0.2 LogP units of RDKit

### Known Differences

Our implementation shows systematic differences from RDKit for specific molecular patterns:

#### 1. Aromatic Sulfur in Heterocycles

**Affected structures**:
- Dithiolones: `C1=CSC(=O)S1` 
- Thiazines: `C1=CC=C2SC=CC(=O)N2C=C1`
- Thiadiazoles with exocyclic substituents

**Difference magnitude**: 0.6-0.8 LogP units

**Root cause**:
- Both implementations correctly identify these sulfurs as aromatic
- Our implementation assigns aromatic sulfurs the value 0.6237 (pattern `[s;a]`, S3 parameter)
- RDKit appears to use ~0.3 for sulfurs in heterocycles with exocyclic C=O or C=N
- This suggests RDKit has additional SMARTS patterns or modified parameters for these cases

**Example**:
```
Dithiolone: C1=CSC(=O)S1
  Our LogP: 1.77 (without H)
  RDKit:    1.17 (without H)
  Diff:     0.60 (0.30 per S atom)
```

#### 2. Complex Nitrogen Heterocycles

**Affected structures**:
- Oxadiazinones: `C1C=CCN1C(=O)CN2C(=O)OC(=N2)C3=CC=CC=C3`
- Pyrazolones with multiple nitrogen substitution

**Difference magnitude**: 0.3-0.8 LogP units

**Root cause**:
- Differences in how aromatic vs aliphatic nitrogen is classified in partially saturated rings
- SMARTS pattern matching order differences
- Our implementation uses exact published Crippen parameters; RDKit may use modified values

#### 3. Fused Ring Systems with Heteroatoms

**Affected structures**:
- Naphthalene ethers with lactones
- Benzofuran/benzothiophene derivatives with exocyclic groups

**Difference magnitude**: 0.2-0.3 LogP units

**Root cause**:
- Minor differences in aromatic carbon classification (C18-C26 patterns)
- Different handling of aromatic-aliphatic junction carbons

## Aromaticity Perception

**Important**: The LogP differences are NOT due to aromaticity perception errors.

Our aromaticity perception was validated against RDKit for all problematic cases:

```
Structure: C1=CSC(=O)S1 (dithiolone)
  Our aromatic SMILES: c1csc(=O)s1
  RDKit aromatic SMILES: c1csc(=O)s1
  ✓ Aromaticity matches exactly
```

Both implementations correctly:
- Mark dithiolone sulfurs as aromatic
- Mark thiazine sulfurs as aromatic
- Handle exocyclic double bonds on aromatic carbons

## Why Differences Exist

### Published vs Implemented Parameters

The Wildman-Crippen method was published with specific SMARTS patterns and contribution values. However:

1. **RDKit may use modified parameters** - The original publication allows for refinement
2. **Pattern matching order** - Different SMARTS matching sequences can yield different results
3. **Edge case handling** - Complex heterocycles may have special-case logic in RDKit
4. **Parameter evolution** - RDKit's parameters may have been tuned over time for accuracy

### Our Design Choice

We chose to implement the **published Wildman-Crippen parameters exactly as specified**:

- Ensures reproducibility against the published method
- Provides transparency (no hidden modifications)
- Maintains consistency with the academic reference

## Accuracy Assessment

### Statistical Performance

From 200 diverse molecule test:
- **Mean absolute difference**: ~0.08 LogP units
- **Median difference**: ~0.05 LogP units  
- **95th percentile**: ~0.20 LogP units
- **Maximum difference**: ~1.15 LogP units (complex thiazine)

### Acceptable Range

LogP prediction methods typically have:
- **Experimental error**: ±0.5 LogP units
- **Method variance**: ±0.3 LogP units between different software
- **Literature discrepancies**: ±1.0 LogP units for complex molecules

Our differences (0.2-1.15) are **within the expected range** for:
- Complex polycyclic heterocycles
- Molecules with multiple heteroatoms
- Structures with both aromatic and aliphatic character

## Recommendations

### When to Use This Implementation

✅ **Good for**:
- Simple organic molecules (alkanes, alcohols, aromatics)
- Standard drug-like molecules
- High-throughput screening where consistency matters
- Research requiring published method reproducibility

### When Differences May Matter

⚠️ **Consider RDKit if**:
- Exact RDKit LogP values are required for comparison
- Working with many sulfur-containing heterocycles
- Need LogP for regulatory submissions (use validated tools)
- Optimizing against experimental data fitted to RDKit

### Improving Accuracy

If tighter RDKit agreement is needed:

1. **Add specialized patterns** for S-heterocycles before generic `[s;a]`
2. **Tune parameter values** for problematic atom types (requires validation dataset)
3. **Implement RDKit-specific rules** (sacrifices published method adherence)

## References

- Wildman, S. A.; Crippen, G. M. "Prediction of Physicochemical Parameters by Atomic Contributions." J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 1999, 39, 868-873.
- RDKit Documentation: https://www.rdkit.org/docs/GettingStartedInPython.html#clogp

## Test Files

- `test/unit/logp.test.ts` - Main LogP tests with RDKit comparison
- `test/unit/logp-detailed.test.ts` - Additional edge cases
- Test threshold: 0.2 LogP units for complex molecules, 0.01 for simple molecules
