docs/SMARTS_AROMATICITY_ANALYSIS.md, before:

# SMARTS Matching & Aromaticity Perception Analysis

## Summary

Investigation into SMARTS matching discrepancies between kimchi and RDKit revealed fundamental differences in **aromaticity perception models**, not bugs in the SMARTS matcher.

## Test Results

Current status: **4 passing, 6 failing** in `rdkit-smarts-failures.test.ts`

Recent fixes resolved indole and pyrimidinone cases. Remaining failures are due to aromaticity model differences.

## Root Cause: Different Aromaticity Models

### kimchi's Model (Conservative, Ring-Based)
- Uses strict Hückel's rule (4n+2 π electrons)
- Only considers atoms within aromatic rings as aromatic
- Filters to elementary rings of size 5-7
- Does NOT extend aromaticity to conjugated exocyclic atoms

### RDKit's Model (Extended, System-Based)
- Uses extended aromaticity perception
- Considers conjugated atoms connected to aromatic systems as aromatic
- More inclusive for cheminformatics/drug discovery purposes
- Treats fused and conjugated systems holistically

## Example: Complex Molecule

SMILES: `O1C=C[C@H]([C@H]1O2)c3c2cc(OC)c4c3OC(=O)C5=C4CCC(=O)5`

### Atom 15 (Carbonyl Carbon in C(=O))
- **kimchi**: Aliphatic (not in aromatic ring)
- **RDKit**: Aromatic (conjugated with aromatic system)

### Atoms 17, 18 (C=C in Lactone Ring)  
- **kimchi**: Aliphatic (lactone ring has C=O, not aromatic by Hückel)
- **RDKit**: Aromatic (part of extended conjugated aromatic system)

RDKit canonical SMILES shows lowercase `c` for these atoms: `...c3oc(=O)c4c(c13)...`

## Chemical Validity

**Both models are chemically valid** but serve different purposes:

1. **kimchi's approach**: 
   - Traditional organic chemistry definition
   - Clear, predictable behavior
   - Suitable for educational purposes and basic cheminformatics

2. **RDKit's approach**:
   - More sophisticated for drug discovery
   - Captures electronic delocalization better
   - Better for similarity searching and pharmacophore matching

## Recommendations

### Option 1: Document the Difference (Recommended)
- Keep kimchi's current model
- Document that kimchi uses strict ring-based aromaticity
- Note known differences with RDKit in test documentation
- Update test expectations to mark these as "expected differences"

### Option 2: Implement RDKit-Compatible Model
- Would require significant changes to aromaticity perceiver
- Add extended aromaticity detection for conjugated exocyclic atoms
- More complex, potential edge cases
- May confuse users expecting traditional aromaticity

### Option 3: Make It Configurable
- Allow users to choose aromaticity model
- `perceiveAromaticity(atoms, bonds, { model: 'huckel' | 'extended' })`
- Most flexible but adds complexity

## Suggested Action

**Keep kimchi's current aromaticity model** and update the test file to document these as expected differences rather than failures:

```typescript
const KNOWN_DIFFERENCES = [
  {
    reason: 'Extended aromaticity - RDKit treats conjugated exocyclic atoms as aromatic',
    cases: [
      // Complex molecule cases where RDKit uses extended aromaticity
    ]
  }
];
```

## Related Files

- `src/utils/aromaticity-perceiver.ts` - Current implementation
- `test/smarts/rdkit-comparison/rdkit-smarts-failures.test.ts` - Test cases
- `src/matchers/smarts-matcher.ts` - SMARTS matching (working correctly)

## References

- Daylight SMARTS specification
- Hückel's rule for aromaticity
- RDKit aromaticity model documentation

Commit message:

refactor: complete kimchi to openchem rename across all files
- Update smiles-playground.html: rename window.kimchi to window.openchem, update title and footer
- Update LICENSE: change copyright from 'kimchi contributors' to 'openchem contributors'
- Fixes final 3 remaining references ensuring complete project rename

docs/SMARTS_AROMATICITY_ANALYSIS.md, after:

# SMARTS Matching & Aromaticity Perception Analysis

## Summary

Investigation into SMARTS matching discrepancies between opencode and RDKit revealed fundamental differences in **aromaticity perception models**, not bugs in the SMARTS matcher.

## Test Results

Current status: **4 passing, 6 failing** in `rdkit-smarts-failures.test.ts`

Recent fixes resolved indole and pyrimidinone cases. Remaining failures are due to aromaticity model differences.

## Root Cause: Different Aromaticity Models

### opencode's Model (Conservative, Ring-Based)
- Uses strict Hückel's rule (4n+2 π electrons)
- Only considers atoms within aromatic rings as aromatic
- Filters to elementary rings of size 5-7
- Does NOT extend aromaticity to conjugated exocyclic atoms

### RDKit's Model (Extended, System-Based)
- Uses extended aromaticity perception
- Considers conjugated atoms connected to aromatic systems as aromatic
- More inclusive for cheminformatics/drug discovery purposes
- Treats fused and conjugated systems holistically

## Example: Complex Molecule

SMILES: `O1C=C[C@H]([C@H]1O2)c3c2cc(OC)c4c3OC(=O)C5=C4CCC(=O)5`

### Atom 15 (Carbonyl Carbon in C(=O))
- **opencode**: Aliphatic (not in aromatic ring)
- **RDKit**: Aromatic (conjugated with aromatic system)

### Atoms 17, 18 (C=C in Lactone Ring)  
- **opencode**: Aliphatic (lactone ring has C=O, not aromatic by Hückel)
- **RDKit**: Aromatic (part of extended conjugated aromatic system)

RDKit canonical SMILES shows lowercase `c` for these atoms: `...c3oc(=O)c4c(c13)...`

## Chemical Validity

**Both models are chemically valid** but serve different purposes:

1. **opencode's approach**: 
   - Traditional organic chemistry definition
   - Clear, predictable behavior
   - Suitable for educational purposes and basic cheminformatics

2. **RDKit's approach**:
   - More sophisticated for drug discovery
   - Captures electronic delocalization better
   - Better for similarity searching and pharmacophore matching

## Recommendations

### Option 1: Document the Difference (Recommended)
- Keep opencode's current model
- Document that opencode uses strict ring-based aromaticity
- Note known differences with RDKit in test documentation
- Update test expectations to mark these as "expected differences"

### Option 2: Implement RDKit-Compatible Model
- Would require significant changes to aromaticity perceiver
- Add extended aromaticity detection for conjugated exocyclic atoms
- More complex, potential edge cases
- May confuse users expecting traditional aromaticity

### Option 3: Make It Configurable
- Allow users to choose aromaticity model
- `perceiveAromaticity(atoms, bonds, { model: 'huckel' | 'extended' })`
- Most flexible but adds complexity

## Suggested Action

**Keep opencode's current aromaticity model** and update the test file to document these as expected differences rather than failures:

```typescript
const KNOWN_DIFFERENCES = [
  {
    reason: 'Extended aromaticity - RDKit treats conjugated exocyclic atoms as aromatic',
    cases: [
      // Complex molecule cases where RDKit uses extended aromaticity
    ]
  }
];
```

## Related Files

- `src/utils/aromaticity-perceiver.ts` - Current implementation
- `test/smarts/rdkit-comparison/rdkit-smarts-failures.test.ts` - Test cases
- `src/matchers/smarts-matcher.ts` - SMARTS matching (working correctly)

## References

- Daylight SMARTS specification
- Hückel's rule for aromaticity
- RDKit aromaticity model documentation
