docs/SMARTS_RING_MEMBERSHIP_ANALYSIS.md, before:

# SMARTS Ring Membership Analysis

## Summary

Investigation into SMARTS `[Rn]` primitive matching discrepancies between kimchi and RDKit revealed that **RDKit does not follow the SMARTS specification** for ring membership counting in complex polycyclic systems.

**Resolution**: The test has been updated to mark adamantane as a known difference between kimchi (follows SMARTS spec) and RDKit (uses extended ring set). All tests now pass.

## SMARTS Specification

According to the [Daylight SMARTS specification](http://www.daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory/theory.smarts.html):

> **R<n>**: ring membership - in <n> SSSR rings

The specification explicitly states that `[Rn]` should count atoms in **<n> SSSR rings** (Smallest Set of Smallest Rings).

## Test Results

### Molecules Where Both Agree ✅

1. **Bicyclo[2.2.1]heptane (norbornane)** - `C1CC2CCC1C2`
   - SSSR: 2 rings
   - Both kimchi and RDKit match correctly

2. **Spiro compounds** 
   - Both implementations agree on spiro systems

### Molecules Where RDKit Deviates ❌

1. **Adamantane** - `C1C2CC3CC1CC(C2)C3`
   - SSSR: 3 rings
   - kimchi `[R3]`: 1 atom (atom 3) - **correct per spec**
   - RDKit `[R3]`: 4 atoms (1, 3, 5, 7) - **incorrect per spec**
   - RDKit is counting using a different ring set (likely all relevant cycles)

2. **Basketane** - `C12C3C4C5C1C6C2C5C3C46`
   - SSSR: 6 rings
   - kimchi `[R3]`: 4 atoms (2, 3, 6, 9) - **correct per spec**
   - RDKit `[R3]`: 2 atoms (0, 1) - **incorrect per spec**

3. **Cubane** - `C12C3C4C1C5C2C3C45`
   - SSSR: 5 rings  
   - kimchi `[R3]`: 4 atoms - **correct per spec**
   - RDKit `[R3]`: 8 atoms (all atoms) - **incorrect per spec**

## Ring Membership Comparison: Adamantane

### kimchi (using SSSR - 3 rings)
```
Atom 0: in 1 ring
Atom 1: in 2 rings  
Atom 2: in 2 rings
Atom 3: in 3 rings  ← Only atom in all 3 SSSR rings
Atom 4: in 2 rings
Atom 5: in 2 rings
Atom 6: in 1 ring
Atom 7: in 2 rings
Atom 8: in 1 ring
Atom 9: in 2 rings
```

### RDKit (using extended ring set)
```
[R2]: 6 matches (atoms 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 9)
[R3]: 4 matches (atoms 1, 3, 5, 7) ← 4 bridgehead carbons
```

RDKit identifies the 4 bridgehead carbons (1, 3, 5, 7) as being in 3 rings, which is structurally intuitive but does not match the SSSR-based definition in the SMARTS spec.

## Why the Discrepancy?

### SSSR vs All Relevant Cycles

**SSSR (Smallest Set of Smallest Rings)**:
- Mathematical minimum number of rings needed to describe a molecule
- Count = edges - nodes + 1 (for a connected graph)
- For adamantane: 12 - 10 + 1 = 3 rings
- Unique minimal representation

**All Relevant Cycles**:
- Includes all simple cycles in the molecule
- For adamantane: 6 cycles total (3 SSSR + 3 additional cycles)
- The 4 bridgehead carbons appear in 3 different cycles each
- More intuitive chemically but computationally expensive

RDKit appears to use an extended ring definition (possibly all relevant cycles or a larger ring set) rather than strict SSSR for the `[Rn]` primitive, deviating from the SMARTS specification.

## Chemical Validity

Both approaches have merit:

### kimchi's Approach (SSSR-based)
- **Follows the SMARTS specification exactly**
- Computationally efficient
- Deterministic and predictable
- May not match chemist's intuition for complex bridged systems

### RDKit's Approach (Extended rings)
- **Deviates from SMARTS specification**
- More chemically intuitive for bridged systems
- Recognizes bridgehead atoms correctly
- Computationally more expensive
- May be more useful for drug discovery applications

## Conclusion

**kimchi is correct according to the SMARTS specification**. RDKit has chosen to deviate from the spec for what they likely consider to be more useful chemical behavior in practice.

## Recommendation

For the test suite, we have several options:

1. **Mark these tests as expected differences** - Document that RDKit deviates from spec
2. **Remove tests for complex polycyclic systems** - Focus on cases where both agree
3. **Add a flag to use extended ring sets** - Allow users to choose behavior
4. **Keep current behavior** - kimchi follows the spec, tests document RDKit's deviation

Option 1 is recommended: mark the tests as known differences and document RDKit's non-standard behavior.

## References

- [Daylight SMARTS Specification](http://www.daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory/theory.smarts.html)
- SSSR algorithm: kimchi uses MCB (Minimum Cycle Basis) which equals SSSR
- Adamantane structure: C₁₀H₁₆ with 4 bridgehead carbons

Commit message:

refactor: complete kimchi to openchem rename across all files
- Update smiles-playground.html: rename window.kimchi to window.openchem, update title and footer
- Update LICENSE: change copyright from 'kimchi contributors' to 'openchem contributors'
- Fixes final 3 remaining references ensuring complete project rename

docs/SMARTS_RING_MEMBERSHIP_ANALYSIS.md, after:

# SMARTS Ring Membership Analysis

## Summary

Investigation into SMARTS `[Rn]` primitive matching discrepancies between opencode and RDKit revealed that **RDKit does not follow the SMARTS specification** for ring membership counting in complex polycyclic systems.

**Resolution**: The test has been updated to mark adamantane as a known difference between opencode (follows SMARTS spec) and RDKit (uses extended ring set). All tests now pass.

## SMARTS Specification

According to the [Daylight SMARTS specification](http://www.daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory/theory.smarts.html):

> **R<n>**: ring membership - in <n> SSSR rings

The specification explicitly states that `[Rn]` should count atoms in **<n> SSSR rings** (Smallest Set of Smallest Rings).

## Test Results

### Molecules Where Both Agree ✅

1. **Bicyclo[2.2.1]heptane (norbornane)** - `C1CC2CCC1C2`
   - SSSR: 2 rings
   - Both opencode and RDKit match correctly

2. **Spiro compounds** 
   - Both implementations agree on spiro systems

### Molecules Where RDKit Deviates ❌

1. **Adamantane** - `C1C2CC3CC1CC(C2)C3`
   - SSSR: 3 rings
   - opencode `[R3]`: 1 atom (atom 3) - **correct per spec**
   - RDKit `[R3]`: 4 atoms (1, 3, 5, 7) - **incorrect per spec**
   - RDKit is counting using a different ring set (likely all relevant cycles)

2. **Basketane** - `C12C3C4C5C1C6C2C5C3C46`
   - SSSR: 6 rings
   - opencode `[R3]`: 4 atoms (2, 3, 6, 9) - **correct per spec**
   - RDKit `[R3]`: 2 atoms (0, 1) - **incorrect per spec**

3. **Cubane** - `C12C3C4C1C5C2C3C45`
   - SSSR: 5 rings  
   - opencode `[R3]`: 4 atoms - **correct per spec**
   - RDKit `[R3]`: 8 atoms (all atoms) - **incorrect per spec**

## Ring Membership Comparison: Adamantane

### opencode (using SSSR - 3 rings)
```
Atom 0: in 1 ring
Atom 1: in 2 rings  
Atom 2: in 2 rings
Atom 3: in 3 rings  ← Only atom in all 3 SSSR rings
Atom 4: in 2 rings
Atom 5: in 2 rings
Atom 6: in 1 ring
Atom 7: in 2 rings
Atom 8: in 1 ring
Atom 9: in 2 rings
```

### RDKit (using extended ring set)
```
[R2]: 6 matches (atoms 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 9)
[R3]: 4 matches (atoms 1, 3, 5, 7) ← 4 bridgehead carbons
```

RDKit identifies the 4 bridgehead carbons (1, 3, 5, 7) as being in 3 rings, which is structurally intuitive but does not match the SSSR-based definition in the SMARTS spec.

## Why the Discrepancy?

### SSSR vs All Relevant Cycles

**SSSR (Smallest Set of Smallest Rings)**:
- Mathematical minimum number of rings needed to describe a molecule
- Count = edges - nodes + 1 (for a connected graph)
- For adamantane: 12 - 10 + 1 = 3 rings
- Unique minimal representation

**All Relevant Cycles**:
- Includes all simple cycles in the molecule
- For adamantane: 6 cycles total (3 SSSR + 3 additional cycles)
- The 4 bridgehead carbons appear in 3 different cycles each
- More intuitive chemically but computationally expensive

RDKit appears to use an extended ring definition (possibly all relevant cycles or a larger ring set) rather than strict SSSR for the `[Rn]` primitive, deviating from the SMARTS specification.

## Chemical Validity

Both approaches have merit:

### opencode's Approach (SSSR-based)
- **Follows the SMARTS specification exactly**
- Computationally efficient
- Deterministic and predictable
- May not match chemist's intuition for complex bridged systems

### RDKit's Approach (Extended rings)
- **Deviates from SMARTS specification**
- More chemically intuitive for bridged systems
- Recognizes bridgehead atoms correctly
- Computationally more expensive
- May be more useful for drug discovery applications

## Conclusion

**opencode is correct according to the SMARTS specification**. RDKit has chosen to deviate from the spec for what they likely consider to be more useful chemical behavior in practice.

## Recommendation

For the test suite, we have several options:

1. **Mark these tests as expected differences** - Document that RDKit deviates from spec
2. **Remove tests for complex polycyclic systems** - Focus on cases where both agree
3. **Add a flag to use extended ring sets** - Allow users to choose behavior
4. **Keep current behavior** - opencode follows the spec, tests document RDKit's deviation

Option 1 is recommended: mark the tests as known differences and document RDKit's non-standard behavior.

## References

- [Daylight SMARTS Specification](http://www.daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory/theory.smarts.html)
- SSSR algorithm: opencode uses MCB (Minimum Cycle Basis) which equals SSSR
- Adamantane structure: C₁₀H₁₆ with 4 bridgehead carbons
